[MUSIC]
>> Douglas: So an alternative to all
of that are Asynchronous functions.
Asynchronous function,s
return immediately.
You call it, it comes right back.
There's almost no passage of time.
And success or failure will be
determined somehow in the future
when the Asynchronous function returns.
There is no solution yet.
The solution might happen maybe later but
not now.
So we like to use Asynchronous
functions in Turn systems.
A Turn is started by an external event,
such as delivery of a message, or
a completion of an asynchronous request, a
user action, or the ticking of the clock.
That a callback function associated
with that event is called and
it runs to completion.
It doesn't have to worry about
races because nothing else
will get to run until it's finished.
When it returns, the turn ends.
So there's no need for threads,
no races, no deadlocks.
It's a very reliable,
very straightforward programming model.
We call it turns because of
games that comes from chess.
That in chess when it's my turn,
I get to control the piece.
You don't get to touch any pieces until
my turn is done and then it exchanges.
We're doing a similar thing
with functions and events.
But when you're using turns
it requires that you have to
follow the iron Law of Turns
which says you must Never block.
You must Never wait.
You must Finish fast.
If you have any code which can't,
which has to block or
has to wait or can't Finish quickly.
It has to be isolated and
run in a separate process.
It is not allowed to
run in the Turn system.
So that's a cost right.
It means,
you're allowed to run some code but
there's some code which you're
definitely not allowed to run.
We usually do this in an Event Loop.
Event loops are Turn based systems.
And they come with Pros and Cons.
The Pro is a huge Pro.
It is Completely free of races and
deadlocks.
And that's a huge advantage.
Any system that applications
should never be written.
I think in systems that use
threads because it's just
too hard to reason about them and
it's too unreliable.
Another Pro is that there
is Only one stack and
we reuse that stack on every Turn.
So it's extremely memory efficient
which is of no interest at all.
Again, because memory is so cheap.
The fact that we're memory
efficient is irrelevant.
What's more important is that
it is Very low overhead.
Because all we're doing in the Event Loop
is take something off an Event queue,
hand it to a function,
let it run take the next one so on.
So there's very little overhead.
Whereas in a threaded system,
you're doing lots of locking,
you're doing lots of process switching,
and context switching.
Which are the most expensive
things at CPU know how to do.
In a term base system, you're not doing
that you're just pull something off
the queue and running it,
pulling it and running it.
It's also a surprisingly
Resilient programming model.
If a Turn fails, it's usually the case
that the program can still go on.
For example,
if you ever take any web browser and
open up the debugger and
just go wading out into the Web.
You're gonna see for
almost a constant string of failures.
It's amazing how much failure is
going on in web pages all the time.
But if you don't have a debugger open,
you don't see it.
Now, in a threaded environment
when one of those,
when something fails,
then there'll be an exception in one of
the stocks in one of the threads will
get on wound and it'll try to recover.
But that thread may now be in
an inconsistent state compared
to the other threads because
it's lost all of this context.
And so, that could lead to
cascading thread failures.
And so,
it tends to be a fairly brittle model.
Whereas, what we see in web browsers is
as long as there is any button that still
works and the user can find it.
There's a good chance they're going to
be able to complete the transaction and
never know that the thing has been
failing hugely behind the scenes.
Now, there's some important cons here.
The most important con is that Programs
must never block commit turns must finish
quickly that we have to obey the law
of turns, that is definitely a con but
it's something that has to be respected.
Also, another con is that Programs
are written inside out and
that makes some people cry.
They call it, it's inversion of control.
It's unnatural, it's an unrealistic way to
write programs which we can't
do it's too hard and [SOUND].
But actually it turns out it's not hard.
It's actually pretty easy.
So we do things in Event driven systems,
they're Turned based,
there's No pre-emption which is really
good that makes them very reliable.
We associate Events with actions.
And it turns out, despite the people who
are complaining that it's very hard inside
out and unnatural.
It's actually very Easy and
in fact beginners can do it.
It's actually very hard.
And in fact, it's how all user interfaces
are implemented even on systems that have
threading.
Because it just turns out this is the best
way to implement a User interface.
Threading has Event loops and
Asynchronous programming
has a long history.
It was done in real time systems, in
experimental systems and game systems for
a long time.
It doesn't get into the mainstream
until the Macintosh.
Macintosh is the first consumer device
although it's kind of expensive for
a consumer device.
Which is programmable only
in a Turn based manner.
Prior to that,
everything has been using blocking
IO going all the way back to 4chan.
And our memory of this is that
when Apple introduced, and
Steve Jobs introduced
the Macintosh in 1984.
It changed the world, and
turned Apple into one of the world's
most successful companies.
And that's not actually what happened.
This machine came very
close to bankrupting Apple.
And part of the reason was that they
couldn't sell very many and the reason for
that was that they couldn't convince
programmers to write programs for
this machine.
Because they'd never seen
an Event Loop before and
didn't understand how to
write programs in that model.
And they were complaining it's unnatural,
it's too hard, it's inside out, [SOUND],
we're not gonna do it.
Instead, they wrote for MS DOS.
Which was horrible and crappy.
One of the worst things ever imagined
which outsold this by several orders.
It was just ridiculous.
So the thing that changed this,
which turned this machine into a success,
was HyperCard.
HyperCard was a system that
was built by Bill Atkinson.
Bill Atkinson had written, QuickDraw,
which was the graphics layer
of the original Macintosh.
He also wrote the first paint
program called, MacPaint.
It's hard today to recognize it as a paint
program because it only had two colors
black and white.
But it was a very it came
free with a machine and
when you bought a Macintosh that was
literally all there was to do with it.
And so, people did a lot of stuff
with that painting called it art.
His next program was HyperCard.
He took MacPaint and allowed it to work
on several pictures at the same time,
only one of which would be visible.
He called these pictures cards and that
a file was a stack of cards or a stack.
And then, he got the idea that he
could put buttons on the cards and
wire those buttons to behavior and
put fields on those cards and
allow those fields to contain text.
Which he could then search for
and process on.
And then,
he added an Event driven programming
language to that called HyperTalk.
Which was an Event driven
programming language.
Everything in it was events and
you would say things like, on key up,
on mouse down and so on, and
beginners loved HyperCard.
They got all into a HyperCard.
They were writing stuff.
They'd start with very simple
little Event handlers and
then start doing stuff that
was much more sophisticated.
Inventing whole new classes of
applications that all ran into HyperCard.
There were predictions that HyperCard
was going to be the future of
software development.
And it might have,
had Apple not run it into the ground.
Atkinson originally demanded of
Steve Jobs that it be distributed for
free with Macintoshes.
And Jobs agreed, and
that's how they did it for several years.
Once they saw how successful it was,
they decided we need to figure
out how to monetize this.
And in the process of doing
that they killed it to death.
But it worked and it inspired stuff
that happened in the browser.
In fact, you see that home
thing that the comps concept of
the home page came out of HyperCard